# Curators Pick: The Lamp-and-Bowl foundation deposit

## The foundation deposits of Khirbet el-Rai
Foundation deposits are an archaeological phenomenon found throughout the ancient world, including ancient Egypt, the Levant, and ancient Mesopotamia. During the 2018-2020 excavations of Khirbet el-Rai in Israel, four foundation deposits were discovered underneath Canaanite houses. These foundation deposits represent an ancient and well-attested ritual, which was practiced prior to the construction both domestic and public buildings. These four deposits from Khirbet el-Rai, called ‘lamp-and-bowl’ deposits, will feature in of the upcoming Khirbet el-Rai exhibition in Macquarie’s new Museum. 

## WHat are Foundation Deposits?
Foundation deposits are usually a collection of items placed underneath buildings as part of a rite, ritual or blessing. This was a particularly common practice in Ancient Egypt and considered to be an essential component of temple construction from the Old Kingdom onwards. The nature and contents of these deposits changed throughout pharaonic history, but deposits were typically placed at corners and beneath the walls of temples and tombs prior to their construction. 

The practice of foundation deposits did not solely belong to the ancient Egyptians, these deposits have also been found further east and in broader contexts. In fact, clay tablets from Nineveh describe the use of foundation deposits in a domestic context. These Akkadian tablets describe the entire foundation ritual: first sacrificing a ram, then libating ‘fine quality’ liquids such as honey, beer, wine and oil over the foundations of the house, and then placing a deposit of important items such as grain, gold, fabric, and even semi-precious stones under the house’s foundations. The placing of a foundation deposit served to protect and sanctify the building, and to protect both the structure and its inhabitants in perpetuity. 

It is then unsurprising that foundation deposits have been discovered under dwellings and buildings in Israel, especially since the Levant and ancient Canaan served as both a trade, military and cultural highway between Egypt and the ‘Near East’ in the Bronze and Iron Ages. 

## The Lamp-and-Bowl Deposit
Although the contents of a foundation deposits varied greatly in neighbouring cultures, specific ‘lamp-and-bowl’ deposits have been discovered in building foundations all across Israel. Dating to the Late Bronze Age and the Early Iron Age, these deposits consisted of a lamp placed within a bowl, and either one or two inverted bowls placed on top. This ‘lamp-and-bowl’ combination would then be placed beneath domestic dwellings, public buildings, Governor residencies and also Egyptian fortresses (in Canaan). The lamps and bowls appear unused, and thus specifically made for the purpose of depositing. Despite foundation deposits being a widespread ancient practice, these ‘lamp-and-bowl’ deposits are completely unique to ancient Israel. The significance of the lamp and bowl is yet to be determined.  
